### Overview
This is an in-development tool for writing relational algebra queries, and executing them against a database, displaying the returned rows. The goal is for this to be an educational tool that performs step by step analysis on a relational algebra query to show exactly what it is doing, and potentially gives a more efficient query. This uses RADB by Jun Yang to execute the relational algebra queries as SQL. Logic operations and multi-line queries are to be implemented soon.
### Installation instructions
Clone/download to a directory of choice, then navigate to `server` to run `pip install -e .` which allows the modified RADB library to be installed like a normal library. Then, in the same directory, run `python server.py`. You must have Python 3 installed to run this properly. To use the website, open `client/index.html` in a web browser.
### Usage instructions
To change the database used, modify `DB_CONFIG` in `server/server.py`. The mathpad lets you visually create queries using its buttons and the MathQuill integration lets you interact in a more user-friendly way. Assignment, set operations, specific joins, cartesian product, grouping and aggregation, plain text insertion, select, project, and rename are all operations supported. If you know the LaTeX equivalents, you can also manually type out your queries in the Raw LaTeX tab. The outer right join and full outer join are greyed out because SQLite does not support those natively. You can copy the LaTeX generated, clear the text window, and run the current query. It's also possible to run multi line queries in the Raw LaTeX tab by ending the query with a semicolon and starting a new line. This is not yet possible in the mathpad. 
